

House of Lords,
London, SW1P 1AA
							Sunday, 20 June 1999
My Lord,

For almost 15 years I have run a small business selling my services as a computer programmer. From time to time questions were asked about my tax status and the answer, from the Government in some cases, was that they were fully aware of the arrangement and were seeking to encourage individuals to run small businesses.
Indeed successive governments have improved the situation for those of us operating small businesses in this way.

Now we are are told this is tax avoidance and the Personal Service Companies legislation has been tabled. I object to being tarred with the same brush as Robert Maxwell and Geoffrey Robinson. I am deeply offended by the accusation that my activities are tax avoidance and therefore bordering on the criminal. I do not run a business to avoid tax it is a natural career progression.

The Governments introduction of the measure has been what I can only describe as disgraceful. The measure was announced via a press release with the excuse that it was tax avoidance and therefore no consultation or notice was necessary. Indeed the claim was made that the years delay in implementation was a major concession.

The statement in the press release was that there was no intention to redefine the boundary between employment and self employment. Now that the legislation is introduced the entire definition of employment has been rewritten so that it is now so wide that it must take in a sizeable fraction of the business community in addition to large numbers of individuals well outside the original target whatever that was.

Further the Government introduced the measure as an amendment to the Welfare Reform Bill at 2 days notice presumably hoping to bury the measure in the furore surrounding the the main Bill. There appears to be no intent to debate this redefinition of employment as the operative parts of the amendment are contained in regulations which have yet to be written and do not require a vote in either House. Even the wording of the subclauses have provoked condemnation by MPs in terms of Henry VIII clauses and Louis XIV clauses.

I therefore ask you to vote to "oppose the question that Clause 70 stand as part of the Bill", the Personal Service Companies clause, the amendment proposed by Lord Higgins, Baroness Anelay of St Johns and Lord Astor of Hever. This is bad legislation and should be consigned to the scrap heap where it belongs.

Your Lordship’s obedient servant, 

Martin Tallett
Director, Industrial Computer Contracts.

